Hello everybody and welcome back in this lecture begins.
Have a look at lighting in specifically the different types of lamp that you can have.
So we'll start off with our default scene here and add in a another mesh and a plane along the scale
that up to 20 times its original size.
So now we've got a cube in our scene a little go g z and lift up by one unit and then going to grab
my cube shift indeed D to duplicate it and move it up on the z axis so it's above our light itself.
And then we can start looking at things in a rendered form.
Now fortunately our lamps are kind of the same across cycles and evey which is great because we don't
have to worry about setting them up too much individually.
If you wanted to flip between the two.
One of the things that you will notice is that the lighting is significantly darker on cycles.
So let's go ahead and switch to rendered mode.
This is what this scene looks like with a point light source.
If we change the actual rendering now go into the rendering tab two cycles it would look very much the
same.
However unfortunately it'll be a bit dimmer.
So you do need to adjust the light.
You cannot just switch it straight out.
The other thing that you will get when using cycles is realistic shadows straight away whereas evey
you may not get the shadows behaving as you'd expect.
Okay.
So with our top cube and our bottom cube our points light source let's go to the light properties and
start having a look at them.
So if we go down now we've not got the lamp selected at the moment we're going to go to the object data
properties.
You'll notice that if you go from a mesh object the object theta properties is the upside down or upside
down triangle the mesh symbol.
If we select the lamp itself we get a light bulb that it's to do with lamps.
So we've got different types we've got a point a sun a spot and an area and you can see they light things
up differently.
So let's start with a point light source it's only directional the light hits it where ever it goes.
Now this is important because this will be lighting up everything no matter where it is in our scene.
And this is great for interior scenes where you need to light things up candles are omni directional
light bulbs normal light bulbs are omnidirectional there are plenty of omnidirectional light sources.
However sometimes you might not want to do that.
So let's have a look at the sun lamp swish it over and we get some weird stuff going on for a start
the sun lamp typically doesn't matter where you place it in the scene but with the Eevee engine you
want it to the other side of whatever direction it's going for the rest of your models you will notice
that if I select the lamp itself and move it look that top shadow from here has disappeared.
And that's because we're no longer in line with it.
If I was to just move it back slightly the whole shadow of that top cube will appear again.
If we were in the cycle's rendering engine it doesn't matter where this lamp is at hold but it does
matter with Evey.
So that's two distinct differences between those two.
Now the sun lamp is parallel directional lights so all of the shadows will be the same.
Whereas with the other light sources they will be different depending on the distance from the light
source.
So a great way of demonstrating this would be to grab this plane here and duplicate it rotate it on
the y axis by 90 to create a wall and then I'm just going to move it back along here.
So here we go.
I'm going to move it so it's relatively close.
There we go.
That's close enough.
So here the sun lamp itself because directional all of the lights rays are coming down parallel to that
line that we can see that incorporates the Aki a move that's if you wanted to.
That's entirely up to you.
Now if we change the type of lights again back to one of the other non directional types we notice that's
here.
The light is hitting this cube and going all the way over here.
And again here to here.
So that's not parallel light.
That's all emanating from the same spot.
Now thinking about spotlights what happens if we turn on spotlights.
Well as you probably guessed it produces what's known as a spot light which is a single circular directional
light.
It's actually a cone coming out we can turn on the cone.
We scroll down the properties here we can go show cone to give us an idea of what is with in the light
cone itself.
If I turn that off for a moment this blend slider I do like this I prefer often the much softer lights
and you can do that by changing this blend setting then the size will change how wide or focused that
particular spot light is.
But notice the cube at the top here is not receiving any light.
But if we zoom in slightly so we can have a look at the shadow that's being produced.
Notice you can turn the shadows on and off which isn't particularly realistic but you may want to do
that.
We have a look at the shadow here and change the type of lamp from the spotlight to point light source.
The shadow remain the same.
They use the same calculations.
So essentially a spot light is a single cone of light as if it was emanating from a single point light
source.
But it's much more focused and then area lights happens to be exactly the same but it's just a little
bit wider.
So at the moment we've got ourselves a tiny tiny window.
That's what's an area Light is like it's like having a window of lights.
So if I set this to be more like 10 meters by 10 meters you'll notice that it is a huge area but it's
also directional.
So if anything went outside of this plane it would disappear.
So if I grab this particular cube go GZ and lift it up you'll see that when it comes in line with our
window coming in we actually lose.
It's being illuminated anymore.
So that's useful to know that that is a directional light much like a window.
If something was not in line with the window you would not see it's assuming no bounce lighting of course
which cycles allows us to do so we turn this back to cycles we get a very similarly yet darker scene.
So if it is dark by the way you play with cycles we'll delve much more into cycles later on.
But under the lamp properties themselves so we need to make sure we got our lamp selected under nodes
click use nodes and then you get the strength which you can turn up.
So if I said that some maybe 500 we get the scene illuminated even so you get that sharp line across
there as well.
And one of the things that you tend to find with the area lamp is you get a much more diffuse shadow.
We have a look down here.
We have a much more diffuse shadow.
So it's all spread out not as tight.
But if we change our size of our area lamp here it's backed down to point one and point one you get
a much sharper shadow much more defined than it was before.
So it's got its uses and that's much like a small light source coming through.
And that's the area lamp for you.
And let's switch back to eevee here.
There we go.
And now that we've switched back to even I just want to show you one final setting when it comes to
the shadows.
We've gone over this once before but since we're working evey it's a great time to refresh our memory
on it.
So if you go to your rendering properties itself so we switch the rendering engine back to evey base
year on shaded mode.
And then if we scroll down we've got this option under shadows and we've got cube size and Cascade size.
If we go ahead and hover over cube size we can see size of point and area light shadow maps.
Okay.
And this one's cascade size size of sun light shadow maps.
So the cascade size is the quality of the shadow produced by a sun lamp and the cube size is the quality
of the shadow produced by all of the other lamps.
So if we turn this down here to 64 by 64 we see that the shadowing gets really horrible because it's
being calculated on a much larger basis.
And then we go to our lamp and switch out to a Sun we actually see it's much much neater and of course
if you do have an outdoor seating you want Christmas shadows when it comes to the sun what's we can
do is go to our render properties and we would have to change this one here the cascade size and bump
it up much higher.
You can see it four thousand pixels we start to get a much sharper edge.
This is not something you need to worry about when it comes to cycles rendering but it is with eevee
because it's an optimization.
One thing you will notice is that if your items are very very small this can start to become a problem
when it comes to rendering in evey because if it is tiny you start to get less defined shadow.
So if we scale this down and down and down and then have a look at what shadow it produces when we lower
down to the ground well it's nearly non-existent yet when it was much bigger it wasn't a problem.
OK so the last thing I want to talk about real quick is if we scroll down go to our properties I'm going
to change it back to a point light source says hello jacket.
Deal with that a bit.
We've got our power settings and obviously if something's further away is gonna be less let than something
that's closer so we've put this at 500 it's obviously going to be a lot brighter over a further distance
than if it's at 10.
So you can change your power output to make it brighter or smaller and the colour.
Now this is pretty cool because we can change the colour that we've got in our scene and a classic colour
setting to have is a blue and orange light.
So if you make your light slightly blue duplicate it move it along say over here and make this one slightly
blue you get a pretty cool looking shadow over on your cube itself we could see here looking at it I
know it's buried in the ground at the moment but that starts to look much much better and of course
you could go over the top if you want to make this a much deeper colour and then go back to our other
lights and we use the outer line selected.
Make this more orange and it can give your scene a particular feel to it so don't be afraid.
Try different color lines and see how your scene works out as you're playing with it.
I'm going to do one final thing here because it's starting to bug me.
We changed this shadow size as pumped that back up to 512.
There we go.
Okay brilliant.
So armed with that knowledge of your different lamps I'd like you to start thinking about how you're
going to light your chess scene.
We'll get to that in the form of a challenge.
And your challenge is to set up some lights in your scene.
Now I'm gonna give you creative freedom here to put as many or as few lights in your scene as possible.
Do you want it to look atmospheric.
Do you want it to just be simple.
It's entirely up to you.
What I'm going to go for is to point light sources quite close to the board and I'm going to have them
slightly different colors.
I'm going to go for orange and blue as my primary colors going on that.
Now you'll likely need to look at your lights shadow settings as well.
So when you're in the light properties go down to shadow.
You probably have to move the starting point since the shadow starts out.
Since the board is a lot smaller than it might be expecting you to have.
And finally I'd love to see your lighting setup.
Don't be afraid to share it with everybody.
You may have come up with a brilliant idea.
Pulls video now and give that a go Okay everybody Welcome back.
Let's go ahead and pull into blender and set up the lights for our scene.
Okay everybody Welcome back.
I'm gonna go ahead now and open up my chest scene.
Okay so this is how the chess scene is coming along at the moment.
I'm really liking it.
But let's see what it looks like when you go ahead and render it.
Mm hmm.
Okay.
Now chess seems pretty small and I remember telling you guys a moment ago that that may cause us an
issue when it comes to shadowing so we may have to scale this up to get it working how we wanted it
to but let's see what we can do with our lamp.
Let's move it closer so we can play with how it all looks.
We'll have to lift that up slightly.
In fact I'm gonna lift it up to point two.
There we go.
That's the right height.
And I'm just gonna move it a bit closer and across now because this is really bright in comparison.
We can go to our light settings.
I'm just gonna just how I can see here and tone that down and let's also it's not so bright perhaps
set it down to five maybe even one.
There we go.
Now the first thing I'm going to have to do here is play with the light shadow settings.
So I'm gonna go to the shadow here and clip starts.
That's a hundred centimeters.
So let's knock that down.
It's a point nought one and we start getting shadows I can see the shadows in here.
That's really good I'm going to turn on contact shadows as well and distance.
Well we don't need them to go that far do we.
Shadows just about right.
I'm gonna play with the bias just to blend it in just a little bit better and the softness as well.
Again it's entirely up to you how you end up setting the scene up in fact because it's so small.
I'm gonna go back to my render settings go to the shadow options and bump up the cube size all the way
to 4 0 9 6 because we have to have those neat shadows I'm also gonna turn on soft shadows.
Now that does have a performance impact but it will hopefully make things look a bit better and high
bit depth.
Let's see if we can get there.
He's looking much better now.
I think this contact shadow that I've added before is causing us a bit of a headache.
So it's come back in turn off contact shadows.
We still don't have these ones here giving us a shadow on a turn down the softness.
See if we can get ourselves a shadow coming in we can definitely get ourselves a decent shadow of the
exponent turned all the way up.
So let's have a look here at the soft shadows.
I think that might be causing us the issue.
Yes it is.
Okay perfect.
Go back to the lamp settings right the exponent is probably a little bit high there.
There we go.
So the lamp is low in our scene.
That's absolutely fine.
I'm going to duplicate that looking from above.
And pop another lamp roughly the same distance away but on the other side I'm going to do that classic
trick of setting one to an orange color and another two a blue.
So make your scores are warm and cool vibe to our chessboard nice.
I'm liking the look of that.
I'm gonna select my chessboard and press the number pad.
Full stop.
I'm liking that a lot.
Okay.
It took a lot of tweaking to try and get those shadows working but I think that was worth it.
And they're already starting to look much better.
And I've chosen to light the dark side in Orange and the light side in blue deliberately.
I could change those around of course but I've chosen to do it that way round for the my my thing that's
going to give for some much more dramatic look.
Okay well I don't think I need to add much more going on here.
I mean you could add a spotlights if you had a dynamic scene you know much like when we had the bowling
scene and we sent the ball into the pins are we're moving the pins.
That's where a spotlight could be really useful so perhaps later on we can add another scene in with
a bit more dramatic lighting.
I like this as an overall lighting feel nice warm and cool side to it.
Yeah I like how that works out.
How has yours worked out.
Please share your work over in the discussions light to see what lighting sets up you've gone for and
I'll see you all in the next lecture.